  • Index
  • December 2023

FCLEX/FNCLEX — Clear Exceptions

Opcode^1

         Instruction 64-Bit Mode Compat/Leg Mode                                              Description
9B DB E2 FCLEX       Valid       Valid           Clear floating-point exception flags after checking for pending unmasked floating-point exceptions.
DB E2    FNCLEX^1    Valid       Valid           Clear floating-point exception flags without checking for pending unmasked floating-point exceptions.

    1. See IA-32 Architecture Compatibility section below.

Description ¶

Clears the floating-point exception flags (PE, UE, OE, ZE, DE, and IE), the exception summary status flag (ES), the stack fault flag (SF), and the busy flag (B) in the FPU status word. The FCLEX instruction checks for and handles any pending unmasked
floating-point exceptions before clearing the exception flags; the FNCLEX instruction does not.

The assembler issues two instructions for the FCLEX instruction (an FWAIT instruction followed by an FNCLEX instruction), and the processor executes each of these instructions separately. If an exception is generated for either of these instructions, the
save EIP points to the instruction that caused the exception.

IA-32 Architecture Compatibility ¶

When operating a Pentium or Intel486 processor in MS-DOS* compatibility mode, it is possible (under unusual circumstances) for an FNCLEX instruction to be interrupted prior to being executed to handle a pending FPU exception. See the section titled
“No-Wait FPU Instructions Can Get FPU Interrupt in Window” in Appendix D of the Intel^® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1, for a description of these circumstances. An FNCLEX instruction cannot be interrupted in this way on
later Intel processors, except for the Intel Quark^TM X1000 processor.

This instruction affects only the x87 FPU floating-point exception flags. It does not affect the SIMD floating-point exception flags in the MXCSR register.

This instruction’s operation is the same in non-64-bit modes and 64-bit mode.

