  • Index
  • December 2023

INVVPID — Invalidate Translations Based on VPID

     Opcode/Instruction       Op/En                                            Description
66 0F 38 81 INVVPID r64, m128 RM    Invalidates entries in the TLBs and paging-structure caches based on VPID (in 64-bit mode).
66 0F 38 81 INVVPID r32, m128 RM    Invalidates entries in the TLBs and paging-structure caches based on VPID (outside 64-bit mode).

Instruction Operand Encoding ¶

Op/En Operand 1      Operand 2      Operand 3 Operand 4
RM    ModRM:reg (r)  ModRM:r/m (r)  NA        NA

Description ¶

Invalidates mappings in the translation lookaside buffers (TLBs) and paging-structure caches based on virtualprocessor identifier (VPID). (See Chapter 29, “VMX Support for Address Translation.”) Invalidation is based on the INVVPID type specified in the
register operand and the INVVPID descriptor specified in the memory operand.

Outside IA-32e mode, the register operand is always 32 bits, regardless of the value of CS.D; in 64-bit mode, the register operand has 64 bits (the instruction cannot be executed in compatibility mode).

The INVVPID types supported by a logical processors are reported in the IA32_VMX_EPT_VPID_CAP MSR (see Appendix A, “VMX Capability Reporting Facility”). There are four INVVPID types currently defined:

  • Individual-address invalidation: If the INVVPID type is 0, the logical processor invalidates mappings for the linear address and VPID specified in the INVVPID descriptor. In some cases, it may invalidate mappings for other linear addresses (or other
    VPIDs) as well.
  • Single-context invalidation: If the INVVPID type is 1, the logical processor invalidates all mappings tagged with the VPID specified in the INVVPID descriptor. In some cases, it may invalidate mappings for other VPIDs as well.
  • All-contexts invalidation: If the INVVPID type is 2, the logical processor invalidates all mappings tagged with all VPIDs except VPID 0000H. In some cases, it may invalidate translations with VPID 0000H as well.
  • Single-context invalidation, retaining global translations: If the INVVPID type is 3, the logical processor invalidates all mappings tagged with the VPID specified in the INVVPID descriptor except global translations. In some cases, it may invalidate
    global translations (and mappings with other VPIDs) as well. See the “Caching Translation Information” section in Chapter 4 of the Intel^® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A, for information about global translations.

If an unsupported INVVPID type is specified, the instruction fails.

INVVPID invalidates all the specified mappings for the indicated VPID(s) regardless of the EPTP and PCID values with which those mappings may be associated.

The INVVPID descriptor comprises 128 bits and consists of a VPID and a linear address as shown in Figure 31-2.

127 6463 1615 0 Linear Address Reserved (must be zero) VPID
Figure 31-2. INVVPID Descriptor

