  • Index
  • December 2023

MONITOR — Set Up Monitor Address

 Opcode  Instruction Op/En 64-Bit Mode Compat/Leg Mode                                                                                    Description
0F 01 C8 MONITOR     ZO    Valid       Valid           Sets up a linear address range to be monitored by hardware and activates the monitor. The address range should be a write-back memory caching type. The address is DS:RAX/EAX/AX.

Instruction Operand Encoding ¶

Op/En Operand 1  Operand 2  Operand 3  Operand 4
ZO    N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A

Description ¶

The MONITOR instruction arms address monitoring hardware using an address specified in EAX (the address range that the monitoring hardware checks for store operations can be determined by using CPUID). A store to an address within the specified address
range triggers the monitoring hardware. The state of monitor hardware is used by MWAIT.

The address is specified in RAX/EAX/AX and the size is based on the effective address size of the encoded instruction. By default, the DS segment is used to create a linear address that is monitored. Segment overrides can be used.

ECX and EDX are also used. They communicate other information to MONITOR. ECX specifies optional extensions. EDX specifies optional hints; it does not change the architectural behavior of the instruction. For the Pentium 4 processor (family 15, model 3),
no extensions or hints are defined. Undefined hints in EDX are ignored by the processor; undefined extensions in ECX raises a general protection fault.

The address range must use memory of the write-back type. Only write-back memory will correctly trigger the monitoring hardware. Additional information on determining what address range to use in order to prevent false wake-ups is described in Chapter 9,
“Multiple-Processor Management‚” of the Intel^® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.

The MONITOR instruction is ordered as a load operation with respect to other memory transactions. The instruction is subject to the permission checking and faults associated with a byte load. Like a load, MONITOR sets the A-bit but not the D-bit in page
tables.

CPUID.01H:ECX.MONITOR[bit 3] indicates the availability of MONITOR and MWAIT in the processor. When set, MONITOR may be executed only at privilege level 0 (use at any other privilege level results in an invalid-opcode exception). The operating system or
system BIOS may disable this instruction by using the IA32_MISC_ENABLE MSR; disabling MONITOR clears the CPUID feature flag and causes execution to generate an invalid-opcode exception.

The instruction’s operation is the same in non-64-bit modes and 64-bit mode.

