  • Index
  • December 2023

SYSENTER — Fast System Call

Opcode Instruction Op/En 64-Bit Mode Compat/Leg Mode                     Description
0F 34  SYSENTER    ZO    Valid       Valid            Fast call to privilege level 0 system procedures.

Instruction Operand Encoding ¶

Op/En Operand 1  Operand 2  Operand 3  Operand 4
ZO    N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A

Description ¶

Executes a fast call to a level 0 system procedure or routine. SYSENTER is a companion instruction to SYSEXIT. The instruction is optimized to provide the maximum performance for system calls from user code running at privilege level 3 to operating
system or executive procedures running at privilege level 0.

When executed in IA-32e mode, the SYSENTER instruction transitions the logical processor to 64-bit mode; otherwise, the logical processor remains in protected mode.

Prior to executing the SYSENTER instruction, software must specify the privilege level 0 code segment and code entry point, and the privilege level 0 stack segment and stack pointer by writing values to the following MSRs:

  • IA32_SYSENTER_CS (MSR address 174H) — The lower 16 bits of this MSR are the segment selector for the privilege level 0 code segment. This value is also used to determine the segment selector of the privilege level 0 stack segment (see the Operation
    section). This value cannot indicate a null selector.
  • IA32_SYSENTER_EIP (MSR address 176H) — The value of this MSR is loaded into RIP (thus, this value references the first instruction of the selected operating procedure or routine). In protected mode, only bits 31:0 are loaded.
  • IA32_SYSENTER_ESP (MSR address 175H) — The value of this MSR is loaded into RSP (thus, this value contains the stack pointer for the privilege level 0 stack). This value cannot represent a non-canonical address. In protected mode, only bits 31:0 are
    loaded.

These MSRs can be read from and written to using RDMSR/WRMSR. The WRMSR instruction ensures that the IA32_SYSENTER_EIP and IA32_SYSENTER_ESP MSRs always contain canonical addresses.

While SYSENTER loads the CS and SS selectors with values derived from the IA32_SYSENTER_CS MSR, the CS and SS descriptor caches are not loaded from the descriptors (in GDT or LDT) referenced by those selectors. Instead, the descriptor caches are loaded
with fixed values. See the Operation section for details. It is the responsibility of OS software to ensure that the descriptors (in GDT or LDT) referenced by those selector values correspond to the fixed values loaded into the descriptor caches; the
SYSENTER instruction does not ensure this correspondence.

The SYSENTER instruction can be invoked from all operating modes except real-address mode.

The SYSENTER and SYSEXIT instructions are companion instructions, but they do not constitute a call/return pair. When executing a SYSENTER instruction, the processor does not save state information for the user code (e.g., the instruction pointer), and
neither the SYSENTER nor the SYSEXIT instruction supports passing parameters on the stack.

To use the SYSENTER and SYSEXIT instructions as companion instructions for transitions between privilege level 3 code and privilege level 0 operating system procedures, the following conventions must be followed:

  • The segment descriptors for the privilege level 0 code and stack segments and for the privilege level 3 code and stack segments must be contiguous in a descriptor table. This convention allows the processor to compute the segment selectors from the
    value entered in the SYSENTER_CS_MSR MSR.
  • The fast system call “stub” routines executed by user code (typically in shared libraries or DLLs) must save the required return IP and processor state information if a return to the calling procedure is required. Likewise, the operating system or
    executive procedures called with SYSENTER instructions must have access to and use this saved return and state information when returning to the user code.

The SYSENTER and SYSEXIT instructions were introduced into the IA-32 architecture in the Pentium II processor. The availability of these instructions on a processor is indicated with the SYSENTER/SYSEXIT present (SEP) feature

flag returned to the EDX register by the CPUID instruction. An operating system that qualifies the SEP flag must also qualify the processor family and model to ensure that the SYSENTER/SYSEXIT instructions are actually present. For example:

IF CPUID SEP bit is set

THEN IF (Family = 6) and (Model < 3) and (Stepping < 3)

THEN

SYSENTER/SYSEXIT_Not_Supported; FI;

ELSE

SYSENTER/SYSEXIT_Supported; FI;

FI;

When the CPUID instruction is executed on the Pentium Pro processor (model 1), the processor returns a the SEP flag as set, but does not support the SYSENTER/SYSEXIT instructions.

When shadow stacks are enabled at privilege level where SYSENTER instruction is invoked, the SSP is saved to the IA32_PL3_SSP MSR. If shadow stacks are enabled at privilege level 0, the SSP is loaded with 0. Refer to Chapter 6, “Procedure Calls,
Interrupts, and Exceptions‚” and Chapter 17, “Control-flow Enforcement Technology (CET)‚” in the Intel^® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 1, for additional CET details.

Instruction ordering. Instructions following a SYSENTER may be fetched from memory before earlier instructions complete execution, but they will not execute (even speculatively) until all instructions prior to the SYSENTER have completed execution (the
later instructions may execute before data stored by the earlier instructions have become globally visible).

