  • Index
  • December 2023

UMONITOR — User Level Set Up Monitor Address

     Opcode / Instruction      Op/En    64/32 bit Mode       CPUID Feature                                                                                      Description
                                            Support              Flag
F3 0F AE /6 UMONITOR r16/r32/  A     V/V                   WAITPKG           Sets up a linear address range to be monitored by hardware and activates the monitor. The address range should be a write-back memory caching type. The address is contained in
r64                                                                          r16/r32/r64.

Instruction Operand Encoding^1 ¶

Op/En Tuple   Operand 1    Operand 2 Operand 3 Operand 4
A     N/A   ModRM:r/m (r)  N/A       N/A       N/A

Description ¶

The UMONITOR instruction arms address monitoring hardware using an address specified in the source register (the address range that the monitoring hardware checks for store operations can be determined by using the CPUID monitor leaf function, EAX=05H).
A store to an address within the specified address range triggers the monitoring hardware. The state of monitor hardware is used by UMWAIT.

The content of the source register is an effective address. By default, the DS segment is used to create a linear address that is monitored. Segment overrides can be used. The address range must use memory of the write-back type. Only write-back memory
is guaranteed to correctly trigger the monitoring hardware. Additional information on determining what address range to use in order to prevent false wake-ups is described in Chapter 9, “MultipleProcessor Management‚” of the Intel^® 64 and IA-32
Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.

    1. The Mod field of the ModR/M byte must have value 11B.

The UMONITOR instruction is ordered as a load operation with respect to other memory transactions. The instruction is subject to the permission checking and faults associated with a byte load. Like a load, UMONITOR sets the A-bit but not the D-bit in
page tables.

UMONITOR and UMWAIT are available when CPUID.7.0:ECX.WAITPKG[bit 5] is enumerated as 1. UMONITOR and UMWAIT may be executed at any privilege level. Except for the width of the source register, the instruction’s operation is the same in non-64-bit modes
and in 64-bit mode.

UMONITOR does not interoperate with the legacy MWAIT instruction. If UMONITOR was executed prior to executing MWAIT and following the most recent execution of the legacy MONITOR instruction, MWAIT will not enter an optimized state. Execution will
continue to the instruction following MWAIT.

The UMONITOR instruction causes a transactional abort when used inside a transactional region.

The width of the source register (16b, 32b or 64b) is determined by the effective addressing width, which is affected in the standard way by the machine mode settings and 67 prefix.

