  • Index
  • December 2023

VGETEXPSS — Convert Exponents of Scalar Single Precision Floating-Point Value to SinglePrecision Floating-Point Value

             Opcode/Instruction               Op/ 64/32 Bit Mode    CPUID                                                                                       Description
                                              En     Support     Feature Flag
EVEX.LLIG.66.0F38.W0 43 /r VGETEXPSS xmm1     A   V/V            AVX512F      Convert the biased exponent (bits 30:23) of the low single-precision floating-point value in xmm3/m32 to a single-precision floating-point value representing unbiased integer
{k1}{z}, xmm2, xmm3/m32{sae}                                                  exponent. Stores the result to xmm1 under the writemask k1 and merge with the other elements of xmm2.

Instruction Operand Encoding ¶

Op/En  Tuple Type     Operand 1     Operand 2     Operand 3   Operand 4
A     Tuple1 Scalar ModRM:reg (w) EVEX.vvvv (r) ModRM:r/m (r) N/A

Description ¶

Extracts the biased exponent from the normalized single-precision floating-point representation of the low double-word data element of the source operand (the third operand) as unbiased signed integer value, or convert the denormal representation of
input data to unbiased negative integer values. The integer value of the unbiased exponent is converted to single-precision floating-point value and written to the destination operand (the first operand) as single-precision floating-point numbers. Bits
(127:32) of the XMM register destination are copied from corresponding bits in the first source operand.

The destination must be a XMM register, the source operand can be a XMM register or a float32 memory location.

If writemasking is used, the low doubleword element of the destination operand is conditionally updated depending on the value of writemask register k1. If writemasking is not used, the low doubleword element of the destination operand is unconditionally
updated.

Each GETEXP operation converts the exponent value into a floating-point number (permitting input value in denormal representation). Special cases of input values are listed in Table 5-17.

The formula is:

GETEXP(x) = floor(log[2](|x|))

Notation floor(x) stands for maximal integer not exceeding real number x.

Software usage of VGETEXPxx and VGETMANTxx instructions generally involve a combination of GETEXP operation and GETMANT operation (see VGETMANTPD). Thus VGETEXPxx instruction do not require software to handle SIMD floating-point exceptions.

